*This post is going to be very dense and cover a lot of philosophy. If navel-gazing isn't your thing, well, you're probably on the wrong website. To help people that may not have much of a foundation in these subjects, I'll be linking out to other resources often, and trying to make references to other works explicit.*

I recently stumbled on a long and fascinating blog post titled [Meditations on Moloch](http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/07/30/meditations-on-moloch/) by Scott Alexander. It filled me with dread and dissonance. It filled me with thoughts and thistles. I have so much to say on this that I can't manage to get any words out. I can only approach this obliquely. Sliding metaphors through cognitive gaps too small to allow descriptions. If the styles of the article and its sources are any indication, this is a common problem with approaching these subjects. After all, how do you eat an elephant hurtling at you at 90 miles an hour? This meandering mess is my attempt to catch the author's hurtling elephant, condense it into a more digestible (if less thorough) form, and add in a few more (hopefully) interesting flavors.

A bit of a note about the format of this post: each section will be my interpretation and summary of the original author's key point plus my own noodling. Inevitably something of his will be lost, and something of mine will be added. I'll try to respect the provenance of ideas as much as reasonably possible.

###### [The wages of sin is Death](http://www.kiplingsociety.co.uk/poems_copybook.htm)

We enjoy beauty, art, and humanity now because we live in an age of [peace](http://www.hsrgroup.org/docs/Publications/HSR2013/HSR_2013_Press_Release.pdf) and plenty. Our ancestors discovered a particularly effective set of resource gathering strategies – agriculture, cities, massive social structures, etc – that we have exploited diligently for millenia. They have set us far ahead of the curve. Since the first time man produced more than he and his consumed, we have re-sown our excess, and harvested libraries, symphonies, marvels of engineering. We've come so far and built so much. We've remade the world. Fortunately, none of these things have dramatically increased the rate at which we reproduce.

Evolutionary pressures inevitably weed out all values except gene propagation. Our lightcones are bounded, making resources inherently scarce. Competition favors those who procure resources more efficiently. Increases in population, utiliziation, or longevity will eventually unearth violent and unending conflict for those resources - a constant struggle for survival which we have spent thousands of years collectively burying. Population is a problem of compounded interest, and to pay our debt to Malthus we will be forced to sell liberty, equality, and fraternity to the Gods of the Copybook Headers. Every moral value is an evolutionary dead end. Beauty and art distract from the real point of our existence: food and sex. The genes and cultures that will survive to shape the 

It doesn't matter if we struggle against it. Not even if we win. You can only [bind Nature](https://web.archive.org/web/20140801022013/http://nyan-sandwich.tumblr.com/post/91621934866/capturing-gnon) for so long. Eventually her bonds become part of her and serve her purposes. If we build utopia tomorrow, and spread it to the ends of the universe, no matter how perfect it is, we still must draw an upper bound on its lifespan. Entropy topples heavens as inevitably as hells. And when that fall comes, the flame, the sword. Whether we buy ourselves a few years or a few billion, the outcome will always be the same.

If this is true, the only reward for consciousness is a keen awareness of what we will lose. We get to meet the pawnbroker, see the abyss stare back at us from behind his eyes, and learn his name before we barter away everything that makes us human. If this is true we should envy our grandparents. They'll likely die free, while we may live long enough to sell ourselves piecemeal into bondage. If this is true, I might as well stop writing this meaningless ramble, and pursue my dream of becoming a dancer. It has the same net effect, and my life is short.

I keep telling myself, a few billion years is better than nothing. I think we could all agree on that, but we are very poorly equipped to make the sorts of decisions required to meet those goals.

###### [Bad decisions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_bias)

Utopia is an easy choice. People make it all the time. A few of our attempts are even fairly well-known: Waco, Jonestown, Utah. They don't all end in gunfire or kool-aid, but none have managed to build the kingdom of heaven on Earth yet. Somewhere on the path through the Valley of Death we always manage to take a left turn into the Valley of Dearth. Our enterprises of great pith and moment are turned awry by a dearth of imagination, a dearth of information, and a dearth of true insight.

Let's take a moment to define utopia for the purposes of this essay. I prefer to define utopia anthropocentrically (although this will likely change when/if I become aware of non-human intelligences). Utopia is a social structure that maximizes the amount of human value extracted from the available resources. Which is to say, utopia makes the most people possible the most happy and in all cases creates as much truth, beauty, love, and other uniquely human values as possible. It seeks the most efficient ways to eliminate human suffering. Utopia mandates a high quality of life and personal fulfillment for all of its citizens.

Our collective failure to build utopia is not our fault, really. We were designed for survival, not perfection. We weren't designed at all. We were selected by that blind temperamental natural idiot Death. We weren't selected at all; we are only the self-expression of the selfish genes we bear. We are the secrets they whisper to the universe, the keys and signs and tokens and passphrases they give to Death in exchange for one more generation. Always just one more. No small wonder we are poorly equipped to build paradise. We are the conversation between two forces who cannot tolerate that outcome.

It manifests in our decision making. In a state of nature we are poor at evaluating costs and opportunities. Our brains have violent arguments with statistics. We call this the gambler's fallacy. Or maybe the sunk cost fallacy. We say that we are "risk averse." But really it's all the same thing: by default we make the fast, safe decision, when the slow risk is often more profitable. These poor decision-making habits may exist in Death's blind spots, or be a [direct result](http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/rev/103/4/650/) of the pattern in which He swings His scythe. We attempt to minimize odds of death on a personal level - because of our selfish genes - when taking larger risks systemically would vastly improve the human condition. We don't care about the human condition without being taught how and why.

We can attempt to embrace rationality on a personal level, but we have to drag our brainstems kicking and screaming. Any individual is capable of making good decisions, given the time, resources, and motivation. Most of us never receive those things, often due to losing the [ovarian lottery](http://www.businessinsider.com/warren-buffett-on-the-ovarian-lottery-2013-12). Those born in poverty never have a chance. When the choice is [marshmallow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanford_marshmallow_experiment) or starvation, we will all choose marshmallow, though it means less later. Even those of us lucky enough to live with supermarkets, robot apartments, and a surplus of leisure time rarely make rational decisions. We are always too hungry to eat well, too tired to exercise, too bored to learn. Most of us don't even know we're supposed to care. Our epistemic and moral responsibilities are not well covered in most schools. Discipline and delayed gratification, what little of them we can attain, are a luxury of the elite and the educated.

Our world, our social structure, our evolutionary drives stack themselves against rational decision making of the kind we would need to build a true utopia. We are left with blind capitals, spectral nations, demonic industries. We are contending against ourselves, our natures, and our drives. Somehow, even knowing that the odds are stacked against our long-term survival, knowing that eternal life violates the basic laws of the universe, I am [somehow hopeful](http://multivax.com/last_question.html). Maybe this time everything will come up lucky 7s. But this is not a hopeful essay.


###### [Traps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coordination_game)

By way of slaughtering hope, even were every single human in the world equipped to pursue their own self-interest with perfect information, a wealth of resources, and beautiful rational thought, utopia would still be beyond our grasp. This utopia would have essentially two goals: minimize present and future costs, maximize present and future human value. Conserve and cultivate. In some sort of perverse variation on Godel's Theorem, it is likely impossible to build a social system that serves individual needs while pursuing these goals. We have only the shakiest foundation on which to attempt such a thing, and no reasonable expectation of success.

There are physical and economic incentives that seem to neatly rule out paradise. Scott refers to them as [multipolar traps](http://faculty.babson.edu/krollag/org_site/soc_psych/platt_soc_trap.html). He outlines 14 different examples in which individual optimization results in a net negative for the whole. These traps are conceptualized as the tragedy of the commons or the free-rider problem, and realized as pollution, violence, and poverty. The inescapable goal of evolution is to enrich oneself whether or not the costs to others exceed the benefit. This is fundamentally incompatible with a system that attempts to minimize total costs across its members, to conserve, as utopia must.

Acting in individual interest to the detriment of the collective interest locks up or destroys resources that could be used more efficiently. Therefore and cannot be tolerated by a society that truly seeks to maximize human value. Resources must be treated as an investment, and their present utility measured against future returns. Returns should be measured not in dollar value, but in human value. A utopia sows physical resources, and harvests art, laughter, minds. Every lost dollar or wasted kilogram of food in the present represents a massive amount of future human value revenue streams destroyed. Thus optimizing for the individual over the collective constitutes unforgivable damage to potential future value streams, which directly conflicts with our utopia's second imperative: cultivate. Ergo utopia must act to limit self-interest across all internal and external parties. In order to build paradise selected Peter *must* be robbed to pay for collective Paul. 

On the subject of value streams, inequitable distribution of resources and poverty, its natural consequence severely impact the value we can harvest from any given stream, and from the sum of all streams (for this section you might think of human value streams as "friends" or "family" or "those damn Mexicans stealing our jobs") Specifically, they cause premature death. Whether starvation, or insufficient access to medical care, or heroin, it makes no difference. On the way to death they cause unhappiness, a lack of fulfillment in life, and restrict the ability to value art, truth, and beauty. As discussed earlier, unequal distribution of wealth restricts good decision making by limiting education and willpower. Poverty is mental, emotional, and physical violence. It is antithetical to the values that make us human. It is the manifestation of the pressures that will inevitably destroy our values. Eliminating poverty must be a primary and immediate goal of any prospective utopia.

###### Compounded Interest

I mentioned earlier that we've been exploiting a specific set of survival strategies.

###### [Moloch](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/howl-parts-i-ii)

###### Immanentize the Eschaton


