My grandfather died this week. It's the first time in my life someone in my close family has died. My grandmother (on the other side) died before I was born, but her husband remarried and I knew his second wife as my grandmother almost my whole life. They got divorced earlier this year. It's not a good year for grandparents, I guess. Anyway, I'm strangely broken up about this whole thing.

It shouldn't really affect me this much. I barely knew him. A stroke 10 years ago left him unable to speak more than a few words, unable to see clearly, and bound to a wheelchair. I wasn't old enough to have a real relationship with him beforehand, and afterwards, communication was a little difficult. The four hour pilgrimage from north to south Utah always ended with a few hours of patient interpretation of near-incomprehensible vocalizations. The only thing effectively communicating was deep and quiet despair.

When we visited, he would always take us to the red rock hills on the outskirts of Cedar City. We'd hike the rough desert, following the same trail each time. I was young, but I don't know how young. Younger than 13, I think. I remember it in scattered bits and pieces: a rusty kaleidoscope, tinted by the sandstone hills. The ruddy smoke-stained roof of a small cave intersecting with a small and simple cairn, pointing the way to past and future summers. I never imagined he'd change, and I think the change never sat well with him.

When we got to the summit, we could see the whole city laid out before us. We could see his house, and pick out individual people walking around. We shared snacks, and watched the valley stretch its afternoon shadows. That's how I remember him best. Standing on mountains, strong, confident, and irrepressibly active.

I'm pretty sure he wanted this. He declined dialysis when his only kidney failed last week. I think he's been waiting for his chance to hurry the end. Determined against action, but not inaction. Is that selfish of him? Beats me. I'm not sure I'm qualified to have an opinion on that. 

I remember him on mountains, but that man has been gone for almost half my life. I never really knew that man, as I never knew the man who later wore his life like an ill-fitting glove. Our relationship was loose in all the wrong places, and now he's gone again, and there's no more chance to darn it. Nobody should have to die twice.
