##Why you should use a Storj client library
We strongly recommend you use a pre-built client library to interact with the Storj API because our service functions fundamentally different from most storage services. On the surface, Storj seems a lot like any other object store. You sign up for an account, and start pushing and pulling data. But there’s a lot going on behind the scenes that you might not be aware of.
For example, the client library is doing a lot of work to help keep your files available and secure on the distributed backend that other object stores don’t do by default. When uploading, the library shards files, encrypts them, caches the keys, preps the file for auditing, and handles peer-to-peer transfers. And while downloading, it does the whole process in reverse and checks file integrity. In the future, it will have a variety of other features, like tracking peers’ performance and using that information to help improve the network.
To support this, the Storj API doesn’t handle file uploads and downloads in the same way as a traditional object store either. Because your files are securely stored on peers instead of our servers, the API can’t provide access to them directly. In fact, it doesn’t interact with files at all. The API server handles peer information, file pointers, and other metadata, but not files themselves. In other words, the API is a lookup and management service that helps you get the most out of the network. It provides the knowledge, tools, and support necessary to use the network as an object store.
Here’s how it all plays out: you want to store a file. You give the file to the client. The client preps it for transfer and asks the API where on the network it can store your data. The API negotiates a contract with a peer for each shard and sends your client a set of pre-written and pre-signed messages addressed to those peers. Your client relays the messages, allowing it to connect directly to those peers and upload the shards. The keys stay in whatever key management solution you want to use; right in your metaphorical pocket. The map to reach those peers is stored on the API server.
When you want to download a file, the flow is pretty similar. You request the file by its its bucket id and object id. The client receives file metadata and sends messages to the peers storing the shard from the API, and also handles retrieving, rebuilding, and decrypting the file. Everything happens seamlessly in the client; you can treat it just like any other object store.
Right now, our only official client is in JavaScript, and can be easily used from any JS backend. In the (near) future we’ll be releasing client libraries in as many languages as we can find people to support. But if you’re interested in diving in, check out the docs on the official JavaScript client [here](http://storj.github.io/core/tutorial-command-line-interface.html), the tutorial on rolling your own client (forthcoming), and hop in #dev on our community slack [invites here](http://slack.storj.io) to talk to us about it. We’d love to support you!
